ODM2 Best Practices:  Use of NoData Values
==========================================

You may be wondering when to use NoData values within your datasets. Technically, NoData values mean "there should be a value here, but for some reason there isn't one." Use of NoData Values is more common for datasets where the spacing between values is constant (e.g., a sensor data stream). In cases where the sensor or datalogger has a malfunction, you may want to insert NoData values to indicate that the sensor should have been collecting values for those times, but for some reason there was a malfunction. You may also wish to add Annotations to the NoData values indicating what the malfunction was, if known.

Use of NoData values is less common with datasets that are irregularly spaced. An example of this type of data would be irregularly spaced water quality samples, where it does not make sense to include NoData values for dates and times for which samples were not collected (and were never intended to be collected). One exception to this might be a situation where you go to the field and collect a set of samples and analyze them for a standard set of Variables each time. If something goes wrong in the sample collection, preparation, or analysis and you don't get data for one or more of your standard Variables on a particular day (but you should have), you might want to insert NoData values for those variables in your database for the dates on which the values should have been observed. Again, you may wish to add an Annotation to the NoData values to explain why they exist. 