ODM2 Best Practices: Encoding Data Reported as Trace Concentration
==================================================================
Sometimes you will see observations of concentrations for some constituents where a numeric data value is not given but the observation is recorded as "Trace" - meaning that a numeric value for the concentration could not be determined but it was determined that there was a trace of the constituent present. These values are censored, but you may or may not know the censoring level (e.g., the level below which the concentration can no longer be quantified).

There are several potential options for coding "Trace" concentration data, and to some degree you might have to pick a convention that works for your research group. The CensorCode of "pnq" (present but not quantified) was created for this purpose and really is the right one to choose if it really was verified that a trace of the constituent was present. But, that said, here are some options to consider for data of this type:

1. Insert a DataValue of 0 (zero) with a CensorCode of "pnq." The value isn’t really zero, and so the CensorCode would contain all of the information for these observations. Some might think this is not the best option because a DataValue of 0 is misleading, but you should **ALWAYS** be considering the CensorCode when interpreting the data.
2. If you can, figure out what the actual censoring level was and record the numeric value of the censoring level as the DataValue with a CensorCode of "lt." Some might not like this method because you lose a little bit of information (e.g., that there was an instrument response that indicated that a trace was measured but couldn’t be quantified). However, it may not matter in using the data. For some statistical methods that account for censored data in calculating descriptive statistics, knowing the censoring level is important and so some may say that this is the better option.