ODM2 Core: Variables
====================

**Variables** specify the property of the SamplingFeature that was observed. Each Result can have a single Variable. Variables are described by a type (from a controlled vocabulary), a unique code, a name (from a controlled vocabulary), a definition, a speciation, a value type (from a controlled vocabulary), a data type (from a controlled vocabulary), and a no data value.

### Variable Types ###
Variable types provide a way to group Variables into categories for easier querying.

**TODO:  Need more information here.**

### Speciation ###
Speciation indicates the chemical speciation in which the ResultValues are expressed. For example, a measurement of "Total phosphorus" could be expressed in mg/L as "P" or mg/L as "PO4", where "P" or "PO4" are the speciation. Speciation is optional as not all observations have a Speciation. Values for Speciation are selected from a controlled vocabulary.

### Value Types ###
ValueTypes, which are chosen from a controlled vocabulary, indicate categories of methods used to create observations. The full description of the procedure used to create the result should be specified in the Method description, but ValueTypes provide a convenient way to categorize and query Variables and Results. Examples of ValueTypes from the controlled vocabulary include:

* **Field observation** - Observation of a Variable using a field instrument
* **Model simulation result** - Values generated by a simulation model
* **Derived value** - Values that are directly derived from an observation or set of observations
* **Sample** - Observation that is the result of analyzing a sample in a laboratory

### Data Types ###
Data types, which are chosen from a controlled vocabulary, define the type of aggregation performed on data values over the time support of the recorded value. Examples of data types from the controlled vocabulary include:

* **Continuous** – the phenomenon, such as streamflow, Q(t) is specified at a particular instant in time and measured with sufficient frequency (small spacing) to be interpreted as a continuous record of the phenomenon.  
* **Sporadic** – the phenomenon is sampled at a particular instant in time but with a frequency that is too coarse for interpreting the record as continuous. This would be the case when the spacing is significantly larger than the support and the time scale of fluctuation of the phenomenon, such as for example infrequent water quality samples.
* **Cumulative** – the data represents the cumulative value of a variable measured or calculated up to a given instant of time, such as cumulative volume of flow or cumulative precipitation.  
* **Incremental** – the data value represents the incremental value of a variable over a time interval Δt such as the incremental volume of flow, or incremental precipitation. 
* **Average** – the data value represents the average over a time interval, such as daily mean discharge or daily mean temperature.
* **Maximum** – the data value is the maximum value occurring at some time during a time interval, such as annual maximum discharge or a daily maximum air temperature.
* **Minimum** – the data value is the minimum value occurring at some time during a time interval, such as 7-day low flow for a year, or the daily minimum temperature.

### No Data Values ###
NoDataValues are used as placeholders to indicate that no value was observed or recorded, but a value should have been recorded. Each Variable has a configurable NoDataValue. NoDataValues should be set so they are outside the possible range of values for the Variable. In most cases a NoDataValue of -9999 is sufficient.